README.md, before:

# Finance Tracker bot

A Telegram bot that helps with your personal finances. It's an experimental and work-in-progress project that provides the following functions:

1. Record an expense/income in a local, persistent storage
2. Connect to a given Google Spreadsheet document via OAuth2

## Setup

Using Google Sheets API requires the authentication via OAuth2 and the user consent using a Google Account. The authentication token is retrieved by the bot during the auth step, but a credentials file (also known as "client secret" file) is required. The absolute path of this file should be stored in an environment variable named `CREDS_FILE`. If that variable is not set, the client secret filename is assumed to be `credentials.json` and placed in **the same directory of the bot**. The client secret file contains sensitive information, hence it should be kept in a safe location.

### How to obtain a client secret file

The first prerequisite is to have an account on Google Cloud Platform and an active project (create a new one if necessary).

*[TODO]*

## Usage

Main commands:

- `/start`: start the bot and schedule a daily task to append the saved records to the spreadsheet. The task runs every day at 22:59 (UTC) and cannot be customized by the user (at the moment). The user can force the append action with the `/append_data` command (see below)
- `/record`: record a new expense/income. You can also quickly add a new record by sending a message with the following format:
```
!<date>, <reason>, <amount>, <account>
```
The line *must* start with `!` and you *must* use commas `,` only to separate fields.

- `/auth`: start or check the authorization process to access Google Sheets
- `/summary`: obtain a summary from your spreadsheet data (*not implemented yet*)
- `/help`: print a usage message

*Hidden* commands:

- `/show_data`: print all the saved records not yet appended to the spreadsheet
- `/clear_data`: erase the saved records
- `/append_data`: immediately append saved records to the spreadsheet. It will also remove all the records saved in the bot's local storage
- `/auth_data`: show the status of the authentication and the configured spreadsheet
- `/reset`: reset the spreadsheet, i.e., change ID and the sheet name where to append data

## Notes & to-do

- [ ] Persistent storage currently uses Python built-in `pickle` module as implemented by the `python-telegram-bot` library. Persistence classes of the library don't support user-defined classes, and for complex data or performance reasons it might be better to exploit some database (e.g., MySQL, MongoDB, Redis)
- [ ] The periodic task to append data to the spreadsheet is to avoid too many calls to Google APIs. Since appending data is a blocking operation, using a scheduled task also mitigates slow connections. It would be ideal to implement this task in a fully async fashion

## Acknowledgments

- The versatile library [python-telegram-bot](https://github.com/python-telegram-bot/python-telegram-bot)
- A Python wrapper to Google Sheets API: [gspread](https://github.com/burnash/gspread)

Commit message:

Fixes quick-add of a new record

README.md, after:

# Finance Tracker bot

A Telegram bot that helps with your personal finances. It's an experimental and work-in-progress project that provides the following functions:

1. Record an expense/income in a local, persistent storage
2. Connect to a given Google Spreadsheet document via OAuth2

## Setup

Using Google Sheets API requires the authentication via OAuth2 and the user consent using a Google Account. The authentication token is retrieved by the bot during the auth step, but a credentials file (also known as "client secret" file) is required. The absolute path of this file should be stored in an environment variable named `CREDS_FILE`. If that variable is not set, the client secret filename is assumed to be `credentials.json` and placed in **the same directory of the bot**. The client secret file contains sensitive information, hence it should be kept in a safe location.

### How to obtain a client secret file

The first prerequisite is to have an account on Google Cloud Platform and an active project (create a new one if necessary).

*[TODO]*

## Usage

Main commands:

- `/start`: start the bot and schedule a daily task to append the saved records to the spreadsheet. The task runs every day at 22:59 (UTC) and cannot be customized by the user (at the moment). The user can force the append action with the `/append_data` command (see below)
- `/record`: record a new expense/income. You can also quickly add a new record by sending a message with the following format:
```
!<date>, <reason>, <amount>, <account>
```
The line *must* start with `!` and you *must* use commas `,` only to separate fields. The `amount` field may include the currency, as supported by the `/record` command.

- `/auth`: start or check the authorization process to access Google Sheets
- `/summary`: obtain a summary from your spreadsheet data (*not implemented yet*)
- `/help`: print a usage message

*Hidden* commands:

- `/show_data`: print all the saved records not yet appended to the spreadsheet
- `/clear_data`: erase the saved records
- `/append_data <when>`: append the saved records to the spreadsheet. If `when = now`, it will *immediately* append the data to the spreadsheet (if configure), otherwise it schedules a new task to append the data at the next midnight. It will also remove all the records saved in the bot's local storage
- `/auth_data`: show the status of the authentication and the configured spreadsheet
- `/reset`: reset the spreadsheet, i.e., change ID and the sheet name where to append the data

## Notes & to-do

- [ ] Persistent storage currently uses Python built-in `pickle` module as implemented by the `python-telegram-bot` library. Persistence classes of the library don't support user-defined classes, and for complex data or performance reasons it might be better to exploit some database (e.g., MySQL, MongoDB, Redis)
- [ ] The periodic task to append data to the spreadsheet is to avoid too many calls to Google APIs. Since appending data is a blocking operation, using a scheduled task also mitigates slow connections. It would be ideal to implement this task in a fully async fashion

## Acknowledgments

- The versatile library [python-telegram-bot](https://github.com/python-telegram-bot/python-telegram-bot)
- A Python wrapper to Google Sheets API: [gspread](https://github.com/burnash/gspread)
